3.5 article (#869)
withastro/astro.build: src/content/blog/astro-350.mdx

---
title: "Astro 3.5: i18n Routing"
description: "Astro 3.5 is out! It includes experimental support for i18n routing, prefetch for speedier page loads, form support with ViewTransitions, image optimization improvements, and more."
publishDate: "November 8, 2023"
authors:
  - erika
  - ema
  - matthew
  - nate
  - bjorn
coverImage: "/src/content/blog/_images/astro-350/post-header-3.5.webp"

> socialImage: "/src/content/blog/_images/astro-340/og-image-3.4.webp"

Reviewer: Social image is still pointing to the old 3.4.0 asset

Author: Yeah, I just added that.

This enables you to more easily define a light and dark mode theme for syntax highlighted code blocks. You might use it like this:

```js
// astro.config.mjs
import { defineConfig } from 'astro/config';

export default defineConfig({
  markdown: {
    shikiConfig: {
      experimentalThemes: {
        light: 'github-light',
        dark: 'github-dark'
      }
    }
  }
});
```

## Qwik Integration

From our community, there is now an Astro integration for using [Qwik](https://qwik.builder.io/) with Astro! You can install the Qwik integration by running:

```shell
npx astro add @qwikdev/astro
```

Or you can install the integration yourself, and update your config:

```js
// astro.config.mjs
import { defineConfig } from 'astro/config';
import qwikdev from '@qwikdev/astro';

export default defineConfig({
  integrations: [qwikdev()],
});
```

Check out the [blog post](https://www.builder.io/blog/astro-qwik) to learn more about the new integration and if you run into any issues visit the [integration repository](https://github.com/QwikDev/astro/issues).

## Bug Fixes

> Additional bug fixes are included in this release. Check out the [release notes]() to learn more.

Reviewer: Release notes are missing!

---
title: "Astro 3.5: i18n Routing"
description: "Astro 3.5 is out! It includes experimental support for i18n routing, prefetch for speedier page loads, form support with ViewTransitions, image optimization improvements, and more."
publishDate: "November 8, 2023"
authors:
  - erika
  - ema
  - matthew
  - nate
  - bjorn
coverImage: "/src/content/blog/_images/astro-340/post-header-3.4.webp"
socialImage: "/src/content/blog/_images/astro-340/og-image-3.4.webp"
lang: "en"
---

import BlogContentImage from "/src/components/BlogContentImage.astro"
import devOverlay from "/src/content/blog/_images/astro-340/dev-overlay-3.4.webp"

Astro 3.5 is out and features i18n routing, prefetch, and much more! This is one of the biggest minor releases in Astro history. You'll want to get it immediately.

> - **[i18n Routing (experimental)](#i18n-routing-experimental)**
> - **[Prefetch](#prefetch-in-astro-core)**
> - **[`<form>` support in ViewTransitions](#form-support-in-view-transitions-router)**
> - **[Image optimization improvements](image-optimization-improvements)**
> - **[Integration hooks to add middleware](#integration-hooks-to-add-middleware)**
> - **[Multiple shiki themes (experimental)](#multiple-shiki-themes-experimental)**
> - **[Community Notes](#community)**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **[i18n Routing (experimental)](#i18n-routing-experimental)**
- **[Prefetch](#prefetch)**
- **[`<form>` support in ViewTransitions](#form-support-in-view-transitions-router)**
- **[Image optimization improvements](#image-optimization-improvements)**
- **[Integration hooks to add middleware](#integration-hooks-to-add-middleware)**
- **[Multiple shiki themes (experimental)](#multiple-shiki-themes-experimental)**
- **[Community Notes](#community-notes)**
```

```astro
---
import {getLocaleRelativeUrl} from "astro:i18n";
const aboutUrl = getLocaleRelativeUrl("pt-br", "about");
---
<p>Learn more <a href={aboutURL}>About</a> this site!</p>
```

Enabling i18n routing also provides two new properties for browser language detection: `Astro.preferredLocale` and `Astro.preferredLocaleList`. These combine the browser's `Accept-Language` header, and your site's list of supported languages and can be used to automatically respect your visitor's preferred languages.

Read more about Astro's [experimental i18n routing](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/internationalization/) in our documentation.

## Prefetch

[Prefetch](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/Prefetch) is a browser feature where you can fetch a page that you think your user is likely to visit, and when they go to navigate to that page it will be (partially loaded). For multi-page apps, prefetch is an important part of keeping your site speedy.

In Astro, in the past prefetch has been available via an official integration (`@astrojs/prefetch`). Today we are bringing pretech into core and expanding what it can do.

> You can enable prefetching for your site with the `prefetch: true` config. It is enabled by default when using [View Transitions](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/view-transitions/) and can also be used to configure the `prefetch` behaviour used by View Transitions.

Reviewer 3: Nit: `behaviour` -> `behavior`
```suggestion
You can enable prefetching for your site with the `prefetch: true` config. It is enabled by default when using [View Transitions](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/view-transitions/) and can also be used to configure the `prefetch` behavior used by View Transitions.
```

You can enable prefetching by setting `prefetch:true` in your Astro config:

```js 
// astro.config.js
import { defineConfig } from 'astro/config';

export default defineConfig({
  prefetch: true
})
```

In addition to being a core feature, the new prefetch also comes with more flexibility:

> - You can define if prefetch occurs on `tap` (a touch that's not a full click), `hover` and `viewport` (when the element is in view).

Reviewer 3: I guess since we're listing the options, it should rather be "or", and also comma nit.
```suggestion
- You can define if prefetch occurs on `tap` (a touch that's not a full click), `hover`, or `viewport` (when the element is in view).
```

> [Prefetch](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/Prefetch) is a browser feature where you can fetch a page that you think your user is likely to visit, and when they go to navigate to that page it will be (partially loaded). For multi-page apps, prefetch is an important part of keeping your site speedy.
> 
> In Astro, in the past prefetch has been available via an official integration (`@astrojs/prefetch`). Today we are bringing pretech into core and expanding what it can do.
> 
> You can enable prefetching for your site with the `prefetch: true` config. It is enabled by default when using [View Transitions](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/view-transitions/) and can also be used to configure the `prefetch` behavior used by View Transitions.
> 
> You can enable prefetching by setting `prefetch:true` in your Astro config:
> 
> ```js 
> // astro.config.js
> import { defineConfig } from 'astro/config';
> 
> export default defineConfig({
>   prefetch: true
> })
> ```
> 
> In addition to being a core feature, the new prefetch also comes with more flexibility:
> 
> - You can define if prefetch occurs on `tap` (a touch that's not a full click), `hover`, or `viewport` (when the element is in view).
> - You can define which strategy is used on a per-link basis using the `data-astro-prefetch` attribute.
> - You can specify that *all links* are prefetched by default (the existing behavior when using `<ViewTransitions />`).
> - The new prefetch will ignore hovers/scroll that occur quickly, to prevent overfetching content the user is not likely to click.
> 
> For `<ViewTransitions />`, the new prefetch also makes it possible to opt-out of prefetch on a per-link basis, something that was not previously possible:
> 

Reviewer 2: ``````suggestion
[Prefetch](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/Prefetch) is a browser feature to fetch pages in advance for your visitors so that they are partially-loaded even before navigation. For multi-page apps, prefetch is an important part of keeping your site speedy.

Prefetch in Astro had previously been available via an official integration (`@astrojs/prefetch`). Today we are bringing prefetch into core as an opt-in feature, and expanding what it can do.

You can enable prefetching by setting `prefetch:true` in your Astro config:

```js 
// astro.config.js
import { defineConfig } from 'astro/config';

export default defineConfig({
  prefetch: true
})
```

In addition to now being a core feature, the new prefetch also comes with more flexibility:

- Configure whether prefetching occurs on `tap` (a touch that's not a full click), `hover`, or upon entering the `viewport`.
- Define which strategy is used on a per-link basis using the `data-astro-prefetch` attribute.
- Set prefetching on *all links* by default (the existing behavior when using `<ViewTransitions />`).
- Ignore hover and scroll events that occur quickly, to prevent overfetching content your visitor is not likely to click.

Prefetch is enabled by default when using [View Transitions](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/view-transitions/) and the new implementation now makes it possible to opt out of prefetch on a per-link basis:

``````

- Manually triggering navigation via the `navigate()` API.

This feature is opt-in for semver reasons and can be enabled by adding the `handleForms` prop to the `<ViewTransitions />` component:

```astro
---
// src/layouts/MainLayout.astro
import { ViewTransitions } from 'astro:transitions';
---

<html>
  <head>
    <!-- ... -->
    <ViewTransitions handleForms />
  </head>
  <body>
    <!-- ... -->
  </body>
</html>
```

Just as with links, if you don't want the routing handling a form submission, you can opt out on a per-form basis with the `data-astro-reload` property:

```astro
---
// src/components/Contact.astro
---
<form class="contact-form" action="/request" method="post" data-astro-reload>
  <!-- ...-->
</form>
```

Form support works on post `method="get"` and `method="post"` forms.

## Image optimization improvements

Astro assets has continued to under go improvements and in 3.5 we now have:

- Original images are deleted from the final build that are not used outside of the optimization pipeline. For users with a large number of these images (e.g. thumbnails), this should reduce storage consumption and deployment times.

> - A new property, `propertiesToHash`, has been added to allow specifying which properties of `getImage()` / `<Image />` / `<Picture />` should be used for hashing the result files when doing local transformations. For most services, this will include properties such as `src`, `width` or `quality` that directly changes the content of the generated image.

Reviewer 3: comma nit
```suggestion
- A new property, `propertiesToHash`, has been added to allow specifying which properties of `getImage()` / `<Image />` / `<Picture />` should be used for hashing the result files when doing local transformations. For most services, this will include properties such as `src`, `width`, or `quality` that directly change the content of the generated image.
```

    return new Response(html, {
      status: response.status,
      headers: response.headers
    });
  }

  return response;
});
```

You can now add your integration's middleware and specify that it runs either before or after the application's own defined middleware (defined in `src/middleware.{js,ts}`)

```js
// my-package/integration.js
export function myIntegration() {
  return {
    name: 'my-integration',
    hooks: {
      'astro:config:setup': ({ addMiddleware }) => {
        addMiddleware({
          entrypoint: 'my-package/middleware',
          order: 'pre'
        });
      }
    }
  };
}
```

## Multiple shiki themes (experimental)

Astro recently upgraded to use the [shikiji](https://github.com/antfu/shikiji) library for syntax highlighting, and we've now added the ability to support multiple themes via a new  `markdown.shikiConfig.experimentalThemes` option.

This enables you to more easily define a light and dark mode theme for syntax highlighted code blocks. You might use it like this:

```js
// astro.config.mjs
import { defineConfig } from 'astro/config';

export default defineConfig({
  markdown: {
    shikiConfig: {
      experimentalThemes: {

>         light: 'github-light',
> 				dark: 'github-dark'

Reviewer 4: Mix of spaces/tabs here that renders differently in the post.

![image](https://github.com/withastro/astro.build/assets/64310361/691dead5-984e-45f0-bf7b-4b98970c8902)

```suggestion
        light: 'github-light',
        dark: 'github-dark'
```

```

Visit the [Prefetch guide](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/prefetch/) for more information.

## Content Collections Build Cache (experimental)

Large static sites that heavily use [Content Collections](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/content-collections/) can try out the new experimental build cache.

This includes multiple refactors to Astro's build process to optimize how Content Collections are handled, which should provide significant performance improvements for users with many collections. 

Users building a `static` site can opt-in to preview the new build cache by adding the following flag to your Astro config:

```js
// astro.config.mjs
import { defineConfig } from 'astro/config';

export default defineConfig({
  experimental: {
    contentCollectionCache: true,
  },
})
```

When this experimental feature is enabled, the files generated from your content collections will be stored in the [`cacheDir`](https://docs.astro.build/en/reference/configuration-reference/#cachedir) (by default, `node_modules/.astro`) and reused between builds. Most CI environments automatically restore files in `node_modules/` by default.

> In our internal testing on the real world [Astro Docs](https://github.com/withastro/docs) project, this feature reduces the bundling step of `astro build` from **133.20s** to **10.46s**, about 92% faster. The end-to-end `astro build` process used to take **4min 58s** and now takes just over `1min` for a total reduction of 80%.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In our internal testing on the real world [Astro Docs](https://github.com/withastro/docs) project, this feature reduces the bundling step of `astro build` from **133.20s** to **10.46s**, about **92% faster**. The end-to-end `astro build` process used to take **4mins 58s** and now takes just over **60s** for a total reduction of 80%.
```
